Using Virtual Reality Technologies to Provide Orientation and Mobility Training to Blind People

1. INTRODUCTION
Why O&M Training
Lack of visual sensory imposes a significant challenge for blind people to detect objects in their surroundings and identify their location during traveling. Specifically, it’s difficult for them to identify the correct path in a new environment and avoid obstacles [3]. Thus, before they can travel in a new place independently, they usually will have Orientation and Mobility (O&M) training to learn about the environment. 
Why O&M Training in Virtual Environment
Under the guidance of an O&M trainer, blind people will learn how to navigate themselves safely and efficiently in an environment based on non-visual feedback like sounds and haptics. The O&M training will help them understand the layout of an environment and build a cognitive map. These cognitive maps can equip blind people with the ability to conduct independent traveling in the same place where they received training. However, traditional O&M can be inconvenient. For instance, it requires both trainers and students to be in a place in the real world to do O&M training, and the schedule can be affected by many factors, like the weather. Besides, some O&M training, like coaching blind people how to cross the road, can be dangerous to conduct in real places due to traffic. To tackle these issues, the research of developing a virtual environment for virtual O&M training has been a popular topic for a long time because the virtual environment is more controllable compared to the real-world environment [2]. It provides a safer training environment and a flexible training schedule. 

VR-based Virtual O&M Training
One type of virtual O&M training employs Virtual Reality (VR) technologies to provide an immersive and interactive experience to blind people. The user can physically move in the simulated environment and utilize non-visual feedback provided by the system to learn about the virtual objects or receive O&M training. This study reviews research that develops virtual reality systems to provide O&M training to blind individuals. The details like design, training goal, experiment and usability of these VR systems will be discussed

2. SIMULATED WHITE CANE     
O&M Training in Virtual Room
One type of traditional O&M training focuses on teaching blind students to navigate an indoor area, such as a classroom. However, this type of training requires the blind students to physically be in that room multiple times to thoroughly learn the room’s layout, which is very inconvenient. To find a more convenient training method, many researchers attempt to develop a VR system to enable blind people to explore and learn a virtual room. The virtual room has the same layout as the real-world room they want to visit. The assumption is that if blind people can understand the structure of the virtual space, they would be able to navigate the identical real-world room using that mental map they developed during their virtual exploration. However, due to lacking visual sensory, how to enable the blind user to detect and interact with objects in VR virtual environment is a challenging problem.
White Cane
In real-world O&M training, blind students use a white cane to hit the objects in the room to acquire information. White cane, also known as long cane, is a crucial mobility tool that blind people use in their daily life to inspect their surroundings when traveling. Blind people use it as an extended arm to scan objects around while keeping a safe distance from the objects to prevent the collision. When the cane tip collides with an object, it will generate sound and haptic feedback. These feedbacks help blind people identify obstacles, understand the surface of objects like texture, and locate themselves during traveling. In short, a white cane is the most common tool used by blind people to acquire information and understand their surroundings.

Therefore, to enable blind people to interact with objects in the virtual room naturally, many researchers choose to apply a simulated white cane in their VR system. Then, the blind user uses that virtual white cane to interact with virtual objects as they do in real-world O&M training. For example, the team of Dr. Alexa F. Siu developed a cane controller system that allows blind people to explore and learn a large and complex virtual space [1].
Design of Cane Controller
The cane controller system aims to provide the blind user with a highly realistic object interaction experience in a VR environment when they explore a virtual room. The researchers invested in hardware and software to build this VR system to reach this goal. The cane controller system employs a lightweight three-axis brake mechanism, a voice coil actuator, and HTC VIVE trackers from the hardware perspective. The three-axis brake mechanism provides human-scale force feedback. It can stop the white cane in the real world if its identical virtual white cane hits an object in the virtual environment. It enables the user to learn the shape of a virtual object. The voice coil actuator provides tactile feedback when the virtual cane hits or sweeps on a virtual object. It empowers the blind user to understand the surface texture of virtual objects. Lastly, the HTC VIVE trackers are used to track the position of the blind user and the movement of the real-world white cane. From the software perspective, the researchers used Unity to build this system. Researchers created the virtual room in Unity and used Unity to provide multi-model feedback (e.g., combination of audio and tactile) according to the material of the object which the cane hits. The researchers also made Unity work with VIVE trackers to adjust the feedback according to the collision velocity and relative position of the user and their cane. To support material-based audio rendering, the researchers collected tapping and sweeping sounds of various objects using a microphone and carbon fiber cane with metal glide. Besides, the researchers collected the acceleration data of the cane when it taps and sweeps on a different surface (e.g., metal, wood, concrete). The acceleration data is used to generate high-fidelity impact vibration and texture frequencies dynamically for the users.

Experiment of Cane Controller
To validate if the blind users can utilize the non-visual feedback provided by the system to explore a virtual world, Dr. Alexa F. Siu’s team experimented with eight blind participants. The experiment is held in a VR room, and the participants were required to navigate in the VR room to collect targets while not walking over dangers and virtual walls. The targets emit a particular sound to attract the participants, while the hazards and virtual walls have different materials and shapes which the cane can detect. The experiment result shows that all seven out of eight blind participants successfully collected all targets in the virtual room. Also, they can navigate the room by using O&M techniques and learn the layout of the room through simulated audio and haptic feedback. Furthermore, according to the user’s feedback, the audio and force feedback in the system is very realistic, and like the experience they would have in the real world. Therefore, the experiment validated the potential for blind people to learn the layout of a VR virtual space by using simulated audio and haptic feedback only.

3. VIRTUAL ROAD CROSSING
Why Virtual Road Crossing Training
Compared to indoor navigation, one of the challenges the blind people encounter when navigating in the outdoor area is road-crossing. Without visual sensory, blind people need to use the audio cue to identify the direction of traffic and find out when to cross the road. For example, they utilize mass engine start noise emitted by cars to identify the beginning of traffic and cross the street parallel to the sound emitted from vehicles [2]. The O&M training teaches blind people these traffic identification techniques, and blind people need to practice repeatedly to grasp this knowledge fully. However, the traditional O&M training teaches road crossing techniques at the actual crossroad, where the traffic can be uncontrollable and dangerous, which imposes a safety risk to the blind student when practicing. Therefore, the researchers explore the possibility of simulating crossroads using virtual reality technologies. Blind people can learn the traffic identification techniques virtually and practice them in a fault-tolerant and stress-free virtual environment. Since the road-crossing techniques that blind people learn virtually are transferrable, they will be able to cross the real-world crossroad after the virtual training using the same methods. For example, Dr. Lauren Thevin and her team built a virtual reality (VR) system called X-Road to provide blind people road-crossing O&M training in a virtual environment [2].
Design of X-Road
The researchers of the X-Road project work closely with the O&M trainers to develop a system for providing virtual road-crossing training to their blind students. The entire system consisted of three parts: a VR crossroad application called X-Road, a self-designed VR goggle, and a headphone. The researcher used Unity and ARCore framework to build a virtual reality application for Android phones. The application can render a virtual crossroad environment of the same size as the real-world crossroad. It also provides 3D audio feedback, such as the engine sound of moving cars, to the blind students to imitate the realistic road-crossing experience. Besides, the application also generates visual feedback for O&M trainers to monitor the training progress and offer O&M instructions to the students (e.g., asking O&M questions and helping with analyzing the environment). Since the X-Road application runs on a smartphone, the research team also created a 3D-printed goggle to hold the smartphone. When the blind students mount the goggle on their heads during the training, the smartphone in the goggle can detect the students’ head translation and rotation in the real world. The application will take the detected head movement into account and dynamically provide 3D audio feedback to the blind students through the headphone. The X-Road system can give blind students a lifelike road-crossing training experience in a VR environment with all these designs.
Experiment of X-Road
To validate the usability of the X-Road system, the research team and 3 O&M trainers experimented with 13 visually impaired participants. The first part of the experiment was conducting a classical O&M class in two virtual crossroad scenes. The O&M trainers asked the students to analyze the virtual environment in the experiment. For example, they are asked to answer the number of street crossings and the position of the cars. Besides analysis, they are asked to perform O&M actions like walking parallel to the traffic and trying to cross a street without hitting by a virtual vehicle. Then, the O&M trainers assigned a score to participants according to their performance in each analysis and action. Eventually, the researchers evaluated the system's effectiveness according to participants' scores in the O&M class. After the O&M class, the researchers interviewed participants to understand their feelings about this VR system, such as if they felt the system was comfortable or interesting to use and if the system was realistic enough. The researcher also interviewed 3 O&M trainers who participated in the experiment to see if they found this VR crossroad training compatible with the traditional real-world O&M training. As a result, the 13 visually impaired participants successfully analyzed the 3D crossroad environment and performed the O&M tasks as they would do in traditional road-crossing O&M classes. Also, the O&M trainers confirmed that the simulation of X-Road is similar to a real-world situation. Therefore, they feel confident about using this VR system alone to conduct O&M training.

4. DISCUSSION
Nowadays, using VR technologies is no longer a privilege for sighted people. The research above proved that blind people also could interact with the simulated VR world through non-visual feedback like audio and haptic. More importantly, the study demonstrated the possibility for blind people to have O&M training in the VR environment, which is a much more convenient and safer choice than real-world O&M training. However, the VR systems for O&M training nowadays still face challenges. As you can see, the virtual environments simulated in the two research above are both small-scaled. One of the pending challenges of developing VR systems for O&M training is: how to simulate a large-scale environment using VR technologies and enable blind people to move in it freely. This large-scale environment simulation will be helpful if the O&M training goal is to teach blind people to navigate ample space, such as a museum or train satiation. An approach proposed by Julian Kreimeier in his position paper is allowing the blind user to walk inside a treadmill while using a simulated white cane to detect virtual objects [4]. The VR system will be more helpful in providing O&M training to blind people when the challenges like large-scale simulation are solved.

5. CONCLUSION
This paper summarized the reason for developing a virtual reality (VR) system to support orientation and mobility (O&M) training for blind people. The environment in virtual O&M training is more controllable compared to the O&M training in the real world. It also provides a safer environment in O&M training like road-crossing. Besides, the paper reviewed two existing AR systems for O&M training: the Cane Controller system for learning room layout and the X-Road system for learning road-crossing techniques. The paper also summarized the design of these two systems and their user study experiment. Both experiments demonstrated that blind users could learn the virtual environment through non-visual feedback. They also showed the potential of applying their systems in virtual O&M training. Finally, the paper discussed the pending challenges in virtual O&M training, such as simulating a large-scale environment.
